.. $Id$

.. include:: ../replaces.txt

.. highlight:: c++

.. index:: fem, mesh, mesh_fem

.. _ud-bfem:

Build a finite element method on a mesh
=======================================


The object |gf_mf| defined in :file:`getfem/getfem_mesh_fem.h` is designed to
describe a finite element method on a whole mesh, i.e. to describe the finite
element space on which some variables will be described. This is a rather complex
object which is central in |gf|. Basically, this structure describes the finite
element method on each element of the mesh and some additional optional
transformations. It is possible to have an arbitrary number of finite element
descriptions for a single mesh. This is particularly necessary for mixed methods,
but also to describe different data on the same mesh. One can instantiate a
|gf_mf| object as follows::

  getfem::mesh_fem mf(mymesh);

where ``mymesh`` is an already existing mesh. The structure will be linked to this
mesh and will react when modifications will be done on it.

It is possible to specify element by element the finite element method, so that
element of mixed types can be treated, even if the dimensions are different. For
usual elements, the connection between two elements is done when the two elements
are compatibles (same degrees of freedom on the common face). A numeration of the
degrees of freedom is automatically done with a Cuthill Mc Kee like algorithm. You
have to keep in mind that there is absolutely no connection between the numeration
of vertices of the mesh and the numeration of the degrees of freedom. Every
|gf_mf| object has its own numeration.

There are three levels in the |gf_mf| object:

* The element level: one finite element method per element. It is possible to mix
  the dimensions of the elements and the property to be vectorial or scalar.

* The optional vectorization/tensorization (the qdim in getfem jargon,
  see `vocabulary`_). For instance to represent a displacement or a
  tensor field in continuum mechanics. Scalar
  elements are used componentwise. Note that you can mix some
  intrinsic vectorial elements (Raviart-Thomas element for instance)
  which will not be vectorized and
  scalar elements which will be.

* (|gf| version 4.0) The optional additional linear transformation (reduction) of
  the degrees of freedom. It will consist in giving two matrices, the reduction
  matrix and the extension matrix. The reduction matrix should transform the basic
  dofs into the reduced dofs (the number of reduced dofs should be less or equal
  than the number of basic dofs). The extension matrix should describe the inverse
  transformation. The product of the reduction matrix with the extension matrix
  should be the identity matrix (ensuring in particular that the two matrices are
  of maximal rank). This optional transformation can be used to reduce the finite
  element space to a certain region (tipically a boundary) or to prescribe some
  matching conditions between non naturally compatible fems (for instance fems
  with different degrees).

One has to keep in mind this construction manipulating the degrees of freedom of a
|gf_mf| object.


First level: manipulating fems on each elements
-----------------------------------------------

To select a particular finite element method on a given element, use the method::

  mf.set_finite_element(i, pf);

where ``i`` is the index of the element and ``pf`` is the descriptor (of type
|gf_pfem|, basically a pointer to an object which inherits from |gf_vfem|) of the
finite element method. Alternative forms of this member function are::

  void mesh_fem::set_finite_element(const dal::bit_vector &cvs,
                                    getfem::pfem pf);
  void mesh_fem::set_finite_element(getfem::pfem pf);

which set the finite elements for either the convexes listed in the ``bit_vector
cvs``, or all the convexes of the mesh. Note that the last method makes a call to
the method::

  void mesh_fem::set_auto_add(pfem pf);

which defines the default finite element method which will be automatically added
on new elements of the mesh (this is very useful, for instance, when a refinement
of the mesh is performed).

Descriptors for finite element methods and integration methods are available
thanks to the following function::

  getfem::pfem pf = getfem::fem_descriptor("name of method");

where ``"name of method"`` is to be chosen among the existing methods. A name of a
method can be retrieved thanks to the following functions::

  std::string femname = getfem::name_of_fem(pf);

A non exhaustive list (see :ref:`ud-appendixa` or :file:`getfem/getfem_fem.h` for
exhaustive lists) of finite element methods is given by:

* ``"FEM_PK(n,k)"``: Classical :math:`P_K` methods on simplexes of dimension ``n``
  with degree ``k`` polynomials.

* ``"FEM_QK(n,k)"``: Classical :math:`Q_K` methods on parallelepiped of dimension
  ``n``. Tensorial product of degree ``k`` :math:`P_K` method on the segment.

* ``"FEM_PK_PRISM(n,k)"``: Classical methods on prism of dimension ``n``.
  Tensorial product of two degree ``k`` :math:`P_K` method.

* ``"FEM_PRODUCT(a,b)"``: Tensorial product of the two polynomial finite element
  method ``a`` and ``b``.

* ``"FEM_PK_DISCONTINUOUS(n,k)"``: discontinuous :math:`P_K` methods on simplexes
  of dimension ``n`` with degree ``k`` polynomials.

An alternative way to obtain a Lagrange polynomial fem suitable for a given
geometric transformation is to use::

  getfem::pfem getfem::classical_fem(bgeot::pgeometric_trans pg,
                                     short_type degree);
  getfem::pfem getfem::classical_discontinuous_fem(bgeot::pgeometric_trans pg,
                                                   short_type degree);

The |mf| can call directly these functions via::

  void mesh_fem::set_classical_finite_element(const dal::bit_vector &cvs,
                                              dim_type fem_degree);
  void mesh_fem::set_classical_discontinuous_finite_element(const dal::bit_vector &cvs,
                                                            dim_type fem_degree);
  void mesh_fem::set_classical_finite_element(dim_type fem_degree);
  void mesh_fem::set_classical_discontinuous_finite_element(dim_type fem_degree);

Some other methods:

.. cpp:function:: getfem::mesh_fem::convex_index()

   Set of indexes (a |dal_bv|) on which a finite element method is defined.

.. cpp:function:: getfem::mesh_fem::linked_mesh()

   gives a reference to the linked mesh.

.. cpp:function:: getfem::mesh_fem::fem_of_element(i)

   gives a descriptor on the finite element method defined on element of index
   ``i`` (does not take into account the qdim nor the optional reduction).

.. cpp:function:: getfem::mesh_fem::clear()

   Clears the structure, no finite element method is still defined.


Examples
--------

For instance if one needs to have a description of a :math:`P_1` finite element
method on a triangle, the way to set it is::

  mf.set_finite_element(i, getfem::fem_descriptor("FEM_PK(2, 1)"));

where ``i`` is still the index of the triangle. It is also possible to select a
particular method directly on a set of element, passing to
``mf.set_finite_element`` a |dal_bv| instead of a single index. For instance::

  mf.set_finite_element(mymesh.convex_index(),
                        getfem::fem_descriptor("FEM_PK(2, 1)"));

selects the method on all the elements of the mesh.


Second level: the optional "vectorization/tensorization"
--------------------------------------------------------

If the finite element represents an unknown which is a vector field, the method ``mf.set_qdim(Q)`` allows set the target dimension for the definition of the
target dimension :math:`Q`.

If the target dimension :math:`Q` is set to a value different of :math:`1`, the
scalar FEMs (such as :math:`P_k` fems etc.) are automatically "vectorized" from
the |mf| object point of view, i.e. each scalar degree of freedom appears :math:`Q`
times in order to represent the :math:`Q` components of the vector field. If an
intrinsically vectorial element is used, the target dimension of the ``fem`` and
the one of the |mf| object have to match. To sum it up,

* if the fem of the :math:`ith` element is intrinsically a vector FEM, then::

    mf.get_qdim() == mf.fem_of_element(i)->target_dim()
    &&
    mf.nb_dof_of_element(i) == mf.fem_of_element(i).nb_dof()

* if the fem has a ``target_dim`` equal to :math:`1`, then::

    mf.nb_dof_of_element(i) == mf.get_qdim()*mf.fem_of_element(i).nb_dof()

Additionally, if the field to be represented is a tensor field instead of a vector field (for instance the stress or strain tensor field in elasticity), it is possible to specify the tensor dimensions with the methods::

  mf.set_qdim(dim_type M, dim_type N)
  mf.set_qdim(dim_type M, dim_type N, dim_type O, dim_type P)
  mf.set_qdim(const bgeot::multi_index &mii)

respectively for a tensor field of order two, four and arbitrary (but limited to 6). For most of the operations, this is equivalent to declare a vector field of the size the product of the dimensions. However, the declared tensor dimensions are taken into account into the high level generic assembly. Remember that the components inside a tensor are stored in Fortran order.



At this level are defined the basic degrees of freedom. Some methods of the
|gf_mf| allows to obtain information on the basic dofs:

.. cpp:function:: getfem::mesh_fem::nb_basic_dof_of_element(i)

   gives the number of basic degrees of freedom on the element of index ``i``.

.. cpp:function:: getfem::mesh_fem::ind_basic_dof_of_element(i)

   gives a container (an array) with all the global indexes of the basic degrees
   of freedom of element of index ``i``.

.. cpp:function:: getfem::mesh_fem::point_of_basic_dof(i, j)

   gives a ``bgeot::base_node`` which represents the point associated with the
   basic dof of local index ``j`` on element of index ``i``.

.. cpp:function:: getfem::mesh_fem::point_of_basic_dof(j)

   gives a ``bgeot::base_node`` which represents the point associated with the
   basic dof of global index ``j``.

.. cpp:function:: getfem::mesh_fem::reference_point_of_basic_dof(i, j)

   gives a ``bgeot::base_node`` which represents the point associated with the
   basic dof of local index ``j`` on element of index ``i`` in the coordinates of
   the reference element.

.. cpp:function:: getfem::mesh_fem::first_convex_of_basic_dof(j)

   gives the index of the first element on which the basic degree of freedom of
   global index ``j`` is defined.

.. cpp:function:: getfem::mesh_fem::nb_basic_dof()

   gives the total number of different basic degrees of freedom.

.. cpp:function:: getfem::mesh_fem::get_qdim()

   gives the target dimension ``Q``.

.. cpp:function:: getfem::mesh_fem::basic_dof_on_region(i)

   Return a |dal_bv| which represents the indices of basic dof which are in the
   set of convexes or the set of faces of index ``i`` (see the |gf_m| object).

.. cpp:function:: getfem::mesh_fem::dof_on_region(i)

   Return a |dal_bv| which represents the indices of dof which are in the set of
   convexes or the set of faces of index ``i`` (see the |gf_m| object). For a
   reduced mesh_fem, a dof is lying on a region if its potential corresponding
   shape function is nonzero on this region. The extension matrix is used to make
   the correspondence between basic and reduced dofs.


Third level: the optional linear transformation (or reduction)
--------------------------------------------------------------

As described above, it is possible to provide two matrices, a reduction matrix
:math:`R` and an extension matrix :math:`E` which will describe a linear
transformation of the degrees of freedom. If :math:`V` is the vector of basic
degrees of freedom, then :math:`U=RV` will be the vector of reduced degrees of
freedom. Contrarily, given a vector :math:`U` of reduced dof, :math:`V=EU` will
correspond to a vector of basic dof. In simple cases, :math:`E` will be simply the
transpose of :math:`R`. NOTE that every line of the extension matrix should be
sparse. Otherwise, each assembled matrix will be plain !

A natural condition is that :math:`RE = I` where :math:`I` is the identity matrix.

.. cpp:function:: getfem::mesh_fem::nb_dof()

   gives the total number of different degrees of freedom. If the optional
   reduction is used, this will be the number of columns of the reduction matrix.
   Otherwise it will return the number of basic degrees of freedom.

.. cpp:function:: getfem::mesh_fem::is_reduced()

   return a boolean. True if the reduction is used.

.. cpp:function:: getfem::mesh_fem::reduction_matrix()

   return a const reference to the reduction matrix :math:`R`.

.. cpp:function:: getfem::mesh_fem::extension_matrix()

   return a const reference to the extension matrix :math:`E`.

.. cpp:function:: getfem::mesh_fem::set_reduction_matrices(R, E)

   Set the reduction and extension matrices to ``R`` and ``E`` and validate their
   use.

.. cpp:function:: getfem::mesh_fem::set_reduction(b)

   Where :math:`b` is a boolean. Cancel the reduction if :math:`b` is false and
   validate it if ``b`` is true. If ``b`` is true, the extension and reduction
   matrices have to be set previously.

.. cpp:function:: getfem::mesh_fem::reduce_to_basic_dof(idof)

   Set the reduction and extension matrices corresponding to keep only the basic
   dofs present in ``idof``. The parameter ``idof`` is either a |dal_bv| or a
   ``std::set<size_type>``. This is equivalent to the use of a
   ``getfem::partial_mesh_fem`` object.


Obtaining generic |mf|'s
------------------------

It is possible to use the function::

  const mesh_fem &getfem::classical_mesh_fem(const getfem::mesh &mymesh, dim_type K);

to get a classical polynomial |mf| of order :math:`K` on the given ``mymesh``.
The returned |mf| will be destroyed automatically when its linked mesh is
destroyed. All the |mf| built by this function are stored in a cache, which means
that calling this function twice with the same arguments will return the same |mf|
object. A consequence is that you should NEVER modify this |mf|!


The partial_mesh_fem object
---------------------------

The ``getfem::partial_mesh_fem`` object defined in the file
``getfem_partial_mesh_fem.h`` allows to reduce a |gf_mf| object to a set of dofs.
The interest is this is not a complete description of a finite element method, it
refers to the original |gf_mf| and just add reduction and extension matrices. For
instance, you can reduce a |mf| obtained by the function
``getfem::classical_mesh_fem(mesh, K)`` to obtain a finite element method on a
mesh region (which can be a boundary). The ``getfem::partial_mesh_fem`` is in
particular used to obtain multiplier description to prescribed boundary
conditions.

The declaration of a ``getfem::partial_mesh_fem`` object is the following::

  getfem::partial_mesh_fem partial_mf(mf);

Then, one has to call the adapt method as follows::

  partial_mf.adapt(kept_dof, rejected_elt = dal::bit_vector());

where ``kept_dof`` and ``rejected_elt`` are some |dal_bv|. ``kept_dof`` is the
list of dof indices of the original |mf| ``mf`` to be kept. ``rejected_elt`` is an
optional parameter that contains a list of element indices on which the
``getfem::partial_mesh_fem`` states that there is no finite element method. This
is to avoid unnecessary computations during assembly procedures.
