.. $Id: model.rst 3655 2010-07-17 20:42:08Z renard $

.. include:: ../replaces.txt

.. highlight:: c++

.. index:: models, model bricks

.. _ud-model-generic-elliptic:


Generic elliptic brick
----------------------

This brick adds an elliptic term on a variable of a model.  The shape of the
elliptic term depends both on the variable and a given coefficient. This
corresponds to a term:

.. math::

   -\text{div}(a\nabla u),

where :math:`a` is the coefficient and :math:`u` the variable. The coefficient can
be a scalar, a matrix or an order four tensor. The variable can be vector valued
or not. This means that the brick treats several different situations. If the
coefficient is a scalar or a matrix and the variable is vector valued then the
term is added componentwise. An order four tensor coefficient is allowed for
vector valued variable only.  The coefficient can be constant or described on a
FEM. Of course, when the coefficient is a tensor described on a finite element
method (a tensor field) the corresponding data can be a huge vector. The
components of the matrix/tensor have to be stored with the fortran order
(columnwise) in the data vector corresponding to the coefficient (compatibility
with BLAS). The symmetry and coercivity of the given matrix/tensor is not verified
(but assumed).

This brick can be added to a model ``md`` thanks to two functions. The first one
is::

  size_type getfem::add_Laplacian_brick(md, mim, varname, region = -1);

that adds an elliptic term relatively to the variable ``varname`` of the model
with a constant coefficient equal to :math:`1` (a Laplacian term). This
corresponds to the Laplace operator. ``mim`` is the integration method which will
be used to compute the term. ``region`` is an optional region number. If it is
omitted, it is assumed that the term will be computed on the whole mesh. The
result of the function is the brick index in the model.

The second function is::

  size_type getfem::add_generic_elliptic_brick(md, mim, varname, dataexpr, region = -1);

It adds a term with an arbitrary coefficient given by the expression ``dataexpr`` which has to be a regular expression of GWFL, the generic weak form language (like "1", "sin(X[0])" or "Norm(u)" for instance) even depending on model variables (except for the complex version where it has to be a declared data of the model)

Note that very general equations can be obtained with this brick. For instance,
linear anisotropic elasticity can be obtained with a tensor data. When an order
four tensor is used, the corresponding weak term is the following

.. math::

   \int_{\Omega} \sum_{i,j,k,l} a_{i,j,k,l}\partial_i u_j \partial_k v_l dx

where :math:`a_{i,j,k,l}` is the order four tensor and :math:`\partial_i u_j` is
the partial derivative with respect to the :math:`i^{th}` variable of the
component :math:`j` of the unknown :math:`k`. :math:`v` is the test function.
However, for linear isotropic elasticity, a more adapted brick is available (see
below).

The brick has a working complex version.
